all right so yeah thank you I'm from
riot which used to be called the
Research Institute for arts and
technology which is where the riot part
comes from but now where the riot
Institute for future crypto economics
based in Vienna and with a few other
places around the world so I'm just
going to start with a short video
[Music]
so that was a video from our most recent
work which was what we call a crypto
theater piece called a proof of burn
which we showed last year I was also
broadcast on television in the film it
was by young gross I will be talking a
bit more about that at the end towards
the end but what I'm going to do is
start with talking about a program that
we a program sort of some works that
we've been doing over the last five
years six seven years now I think
actually could experiments and mountain
value and it's kind of how we ended up
to where we are right now with the
Institute for future crypto economics so
I'm going to start with actually one of
my works before we started working as a
collaborative riot and that's why it's
called the old in-out so in 2011 I was
starting work on a PhD that was
examining how we can understand the
value of the material specifically how
value can be ascribed to knowledge
produced by artists this new economy at
the time was described as a knowledge
economy creative economy post fordist
economy cognitive cultural economy so
this is like the economy that we've been
working in the last 20 years or so and
like Marx described as an economy where
knowledge becomes the greatest
productive force and one where direct
labor and its quantity disappear as a
determinant principle of production to
become and of course indispensable but
subordinate moment compared to general
scientific labor and so this point
general scientific labor that Marx
actually distinguishes both the artistic
and scientific development of
individuals as this scientific labor so
it's not necessarily only what we
consider science these days but
generally serve research knowledge
production so what happened in the early
2000s this sort of new discipline came
about called artistic research it's was
very big in the in the UK Australia and
in Canada has has hasn't released have
taken off warehouse a bit now in in the
United States and also came up a bit
later
in Europe artistic research was sort of
developed kind of to deal with general
sort of market forces in a sense because
articles were sort of being integrated
within universities and when they were
integrated into universities the sort of
general requirements of academics
working at universities to produce
research was now being applied to
artists and so I just had to describe
the work that they produced as artists
teaching at art schools as a type of
research so their artworks the
exhibitions was a form of knowledge
production and so a lot of people start
discussing like what does it mean to
create knowledge what house in artwork
considered knowledge and so late yeah as
like was beginning to reconfigure itself
as a type of of knowledge mmm like
asserting its value within this
knowledge economy it was really risked
infecting itself by like communing with
what I call the disease discipline of
science that the military industrial
complexes as bettered and so science is
a different type of knowledge and what
happened is we had the scientism being
introduced into artistic practice so we
kind of said describe the outputs the
artistic outputs the knowledge created
within artworks within the same sort of
like realm as a scientific knowledge and
and then we started having questions
about like so what is what is truth like
because truth is what's knowledge and
how do we value that so this is a quote
from Andre goats which is kind of like
what I like to describe but I was
looking at in my practice at the time so
only the capacities that exceed any
productive functionality only the
culture that serves no purpose render a
society capable of posing questions
about the changes going on within it and
imprinting a new meaning on them or a
meaning on them and so what I want to
mean by here is there's a distinction
between types of knowledge production we
have like applied research knowledge for
the purpose to do something and basic
research knowledge for no purpose in a
sense knowledge for the purpose of
knowledge but even the term purpose kind
of can't be used there
and so then when we get into this is
basic knowledge the knowledge for no
purpose we have the different types of
knowledge that we need to unravel sort
of like knowledge for truth and
knowledge for meaning and so this
knowledge of meaning is is what we're
kind of looking at in terms of that
artistic research notice the production
so this is a work I did the old in-out
was a durational performance where i was
stamping on sheets paper in and out for
days actually Yusuf was invited to
perform this once as a entertainment at
the sort of Union sort of like the work
conference so that unions got together
and how this big conference on knowledge
work and I was supposed to be the dinner
entertainment because the yes sir the
string ensemble is a bit too expensive
and yeah they had all of the union
representatives coming up to me and
serve like saying are you okay do you
mind stop being late because you know
the work goes on for a long time begin
to to bleed so but this this was a work
that was kind of saying how labor like
applying these sort of terms in and out
this is a form of Labor's because when
we talk about of Labor is basically our
body changing something like that's
that's what it originally started off is
asked then we start to use tools
technologies and and then it's gone a
bit further than that so this is what
imprinting meaning on this and so like
it was a bit of an absurd act it was
also kind of trying to ask like what is
the value of artistic production and
this was like a quote from one of the
essays which I really like to quote that
was written about my my work and so one
can only surmise that Newman does
nothing useful a toxic asset worthy of
liquidation so mmm this is this is kind
of what we think about what how art can
be considered in in sort of like the
knowledge economy in a sense beyond just
my self so we could say one can only
surmise that art does nothing useful the
toxic asset were the worthy of
liquidation so yeah I was doing this
work when I was at a conference um sort
of
research and I met mr. Savitch who was
working on a project in Vienna called
artistic technology and he was kind of
dealing with the same sorts of questions
specifically around media art and how
value can be ascribed to media so like
there was this was in like 2011 and
they'd been loved discussion on the
crisis of new media art like what is the
purpose of new media art after the web
hasn't already fulfilled its purpose and
now we're just like fluttering about in
these networked cultures that kind of
exist beyond the media arts and so like
Hitler Vinc
media theorist Netherlands wrote like
there was and still is no market for
media art no galleries few curators and
critics and no audience and so there is
a need for a new distributed form of
attention and presentation for art new
media art new markets for the new
economies that are emerging like the
sharing economy the platform economy the
conceptual economy all this stuff we
hear about all the time and of course
the attention economy and so we find
ourselves in an age of capitalism that
feels itself with the effigies of
knowledge creativity and individually
the individuality openness and the
social so these things all kind of burnt
to produce knowledge and they're not
actually valued in itself and this
knowledge there's an applied type of
knowledge which is more to do something
rather than to know something and so the
artists should be well placed to supply
the increasing demand for these
resources that they should be but they
often aren't and once they've extracted
from the art world integrated into the
creative industries the whole artistic
component and I I wonder stuff like
distinguished artistic from creative is
often lost and so with this was like
what we were working on is the work the
Bitcoin cloud that came up next and it
was like how how do we create a work of
art in a world where our prices go up
and not when the whole society becomes
wealthier but when income inequality
increases so when when there's more
income inequality the higher the value
of art so it's only a time when the rich
get richer and the poor get poorer
yada yada yada and this is the time the
knowledge economy hmm and so we created
this work in 2011 could the Bitcoin
cloud so this was like one of the first
works that we kind of produced at the
time we were called artistic bouquet not
riot and so the Bitcoin cloud it was
sort of all of these computer fans as
you can see they're like hovering above
your head they a few hundred of them
glowing and reacting to your movement
throughout the exhibition space your
presence your attendance to this artwork
like generated Bitcoin so the your
attention to the artwork had chords the
artwork real monetary value so at your
feet are several computers you hear the
noise the fans power on as more people
into the exhibition space the cloud of
computer fans above you begin to spin to
glow more brightly so the Bitcoin cloud
sort of worked by dedicating a certain
amount of processing power to the mining
rig according to the number of visitors
and the intensity of the interaction
with the installation so like the work
generated valley whenever there were
people in the audience when there was
when there's no one in the gallery the
the Bitcoin mining rig was not doing
anything and then where there were more
people and then there was more movement
it was dedicate more processing power
towards the Bitcoin mining and this was
2011 so it was actually possible to do
this you wouldn't be able to do it
anymore so so yeah so this was like idea
of how an artwork can generate its own
value they threw attention and this was
we started using Bitcoin at the time it
was just a an idea it was like a tool
that we saw this would be interesting to
kind of create value by generating
Bitcoin we didn't sort of really sort of
think too far ahead about how this could
completely Bitcoin could completely
change the whole economic models of the
future so this will quote from Vic and
Stein we should have is nice to put next
to the Bitcoin cloud
so yeah Bitcoin cloud creates new
bitcoins increases value only if it
receives enough attention these dynamics
of attention allow an ambiguous
existence Bitcoin cloud is a part of the
art market at the same time as it is
setting itself from this market by
capitalizing on its own economic
tenshun belly the bitcoins earned by the
attention to Bitcoin cloud were then
used in later experiments that we did
that I'm talking about now which the
blockchain performance so the blockchain
performance was based around these ii
sunflower seeds which I'll show you a
picture of soon so in 2010 to take
modern commissioned iyy to produce
sunflower seeds the work consisted of
100 million double burned and
hand-painted Paulson seeds in the
Chinese city of Jian design 1600 people
had been working on the project for over
two years
visitors at the tate stole a great
number of these small porcelain objects
and started to sell them on both
Facebook and eBay the tape soon decided
to not let visitors near the artwork
although they cited health concerns due
to the porcelain dust rather than art
theft as before staying away so in
Sotheby's in Sotheby's auction in 20
2011 100 kilograms of the sunflower
seeds sold for five hundred and fifty
nine thousand dollars and in 2012 they
take purchased 8 million seeds ten
thousand kilos and ten percent of the
total
artwork and so these purchases created a
market valley and value for the stolen
seeds so that tapes purchase of the
seeds had originally valued them at 3
pounds 50 apiece 60 years ago the prices
for our ways sunflower seeds on ebay
range from 22 cents to 20 dollars
however like the authenticity of many of
these seeds is questionable because many
their whole black market emerged in
creating fakes for these seeds so in
2012 we purchased 20 seeds as part of
the work blockchain performance from
Franny leach who ran a space bank
Mexican writer and media artist so space
bank had a virtual currency that was
backed by hijacked by once sunflower
seeds and the blockchain performance
included transferring 6.8 bitcoins that
we mined through the bitcoin cloud to
purchase the 20 seeds so the 20 the
transaction between artistic a and space
bank stays active in the blockchain and
is viewable to the state there's six
point eight bitcoins that we used to
purchase the 27 flower seeds from space
Bank were valued at
time as $6,000 and they're currently
valued at $55,000
so these 6.8 bitcoins were generated
from the attention so they back to the
original artwork these seeds were
generated from the attention that was
paid to the Bitcoin cloud and so if the
Bitcoin cloud had dedicated all of its
processing power so not just when people
were paying attention to the artwork but
the whole processing power for when it
was exhibited within the museums and
galleries we would have generated
approximately 3.7 million dollars worth
of bitcoins valued at today's rate so
the value of the artwork remains
ambiguous it could be sort of measured
by its attention its exchange value for
the sunflower seeds its exchange
established artworks within the existing
art market or could also be measured by
its potential loss of earnings within
the Bitcoin market and so then we moved
on to another work or too much money
which we wish we would have had with the
last of our bitcoins from the bitcoin
cloud so this was done in cooperation
with society realist or French
collective and George papadopolis Greek
economy economy
economics and arts writer so this work
was kind of we were looking at sort of
how much how much does money cost that's
like an interesting question because
it's not how much money is valued but
how much does it cost and how much does
it cost to store money which is like one
way of measuring how the money can be
cost something so the US dollar is
required to be kept in Austrian banks
and it's like the the most expensive
note to keep because and requires a lot
of storage space to keep us $1 notes in
Austrian real estate and so we purchased
as many us $1 as we could with our
remaining bitcoins from the bitcoin
cloud to create this work too much money
and so this this installation addresses
the ambivalent relationship between art
and the market pointing to the
problematic
of commodification alienation and
co-optation of creativity so the works
society realist which was produced full
insulation a proposal for a new
alphabetic order based on the ex
Ferrante's writing system and pegged on
the US dollar rates is a comment on the
ability of the market to create an order
of meaning hinting also the similarities
between market and money so if we look
at sort of how money and markets create
meaning and this is like how we exist
today so the juxtaposition of this work
with this object 4107 one dollar bills
is just if as it subtle the relationship
between the artwork and the bills is
multi-directional art creates money both
by representing it but also by creating
value through the actual value of the
artwork but also through the surplus
value of art for other economic fields
of activity so conversely money creates
art by providing the very means of
artistic production but also by
valorising the art work effectively
acknowledging it as art money is of
critical importance both for the Arts in
society the only problem being that
they're assuming simultaneously not
enough and also too much so that was
this work and you know while we closed
down the work I was packing up the one
dollar bills which we have in like a
plastic bag in our studio to this day
you have to wonder sort of like money is
just a material just like any other just
any other medium and at any moment we
could have cashed out this artwork but
the value remains it is an art object
now and and we keep it to exhibit it and
we hope that having the value will
increase at some stage that we could
maybe sold the four thousand one hundred
and seven dollars for the four thousand
one hundred and eight at least from
Georges Papadopoulos who was one of the
co-authors of the work yeah so the
system of prices organizes an order of
meaning where taste subjectivity and
community are reconfigured according to
the mandates and the geopolitics of the
art market so in this hostile
environment the Alice needs to create
new possibilities of Independence and so
this is kind of
we got to next creating these new
possibilities I'm gonna skip over this
because I'm getting a bit of time but in
2014 we sort of like did a big research
project sort of looking at all the
difference of economic models that were
being created with old coins so at the
time still you know this is before III M
we had really taken off we were looking
at all these like funny rules of
collectives that were just playing
around with the source code of Bitcoin
and then building other things upon it
to create different economic models like
pizza coin 1 coin coins a bit more
recent but so here you can see the paper
at right academia.edu if you want to
find it and so this is sort of like a
map from map of coins the really cool
website we can look at how all of the
different coins evolved so yeah the main
point was that this whole idea of
Bitcoin to kind of get rid of the
central authority just doesn't really
work in practice and sort of the the
whole sort of philosophy and beliefs of
the cypherpunks
I kind of been proven sort of wrong this
one vote one computer thing didn't
really happen as Nakamoto kind of would
have hoped
I imagine bringing thoughts in his or
her head but so we we kind of looked at
that
this is summarized by Jaya breka who's I
spoke as part of proof a burn like a
decentralized network does not mean
decentralized power so still value is
ascribed by people with capital people
they're able to purchase the mining rigs
or people that control this sort of
central markets this is why we need to
move to D central decentralized markets
to kind of actually get to the process
of being outsourced of control value
like individually and so this work kind
of comes up to proof of burn which the
first video was from and I'm going to
show you a little bit of a video from
the the film again but it's in German so
I kind of just give you the gist of it
while it's playing
it's from the 80s news story about how
negative everyone's inner machine in
basically going through the history of
machines
[Music]
shows one of the countries that we
created for the artwork no yep so these
are these are some ceramic shards that
we created for the performance
[Music]
this is something that we kind of get
back to like how knowledge is relating
to value so when we look at sort of the
major problems with crypto markets and
generally also of economic markets is
this idea of information asymmetry so
some people have more knowledge and a
better advantage to take a part of these
things and so this is there really
something that needs to work we need to
work through to sort of allow people to
take control of their own sub currency
to actually get into the cypher punks
sort of utopia or post
utopia sorry how am I going for time see
so yeah everyone hopefully knows a bit
about proof of work so we've discussed
it we've discussed blockchain yesterday
and the canoe is a consensus algorithm
so how do we get the computer networks
to agree that something is something
something is true and so the consensus
algorithm that Bitcoin use is one of the
first consensus algorithms of blockchain
was proof of work so if statements us
like assigned a truth value only if they
can be given a constructive proof and
peripheral work was what was done with
the Bitcoin so but then if you think
about sort of actual when I was talking
about lake truth versus meaning and
different types of knowledge production
if we look at select multi faceted logic
such as fuzzy logic how can we allow for
more than two truth values and sort of
especially you know in this era of post
truth and what we could all say post
consensus it would may have got this
place of post value as well and so this
is like a Bitcoin mining town
and this is kind of what we're looking
at is when the computers are doing all
the work like what what is the role so
the computers solve the problems then
they get ascribed the valley through the
Bitcoin through the mining rig and then
what happens to the people so this was
like a kind of little experiment that we
did could proof of presence which is
like dealing with a what many years what
currency is which is essentially a
promise a belief system and let how
people can create their own sort of
markets just by being and so this was
the the installation we created a system
based on the nem tokens which is a proof
of authority but what we did was a you
might have seen how it works outside but
basically people will sort of like login
to the what we called the shrine touched
it and the longer they're there they as
they're there being present there they
start to earn the tokens the more people
that come there the less tokens an
individual learns earns and the longer
they stay there the less they are able
to earn as well so the best thing to do
if you knew what was going on like again
with the information asymmetry is to
come in first be there alone and then
you learn the most possible capital and
let leave before the others get there
and so this is kind of how markets work
now as well and then what we have is
what we did during so the performance
was we split the audience up into two
groups so some people knew how the
tokens work how them how the algorithm
worked and so they had an advantage
versus the people that kind of didn't
really know what was going on and just
like stood there for ages trying to earn
as much currency as possible so this has
had a festival good future of
demonstration and you could use the
tokens which we caught Dark Presence was
a decentralized autonomous research
cluster which was the name of our group
at the time again so to earn the tokens
and you could buy drinks with it you
could get to the after-party with it and
these ceramics
I showed earlier you could exchange for
which had even more valley actually need
the shots to get to the the big party at
the end also but like yeah so there were
people that came in and knew how the
system work and will be able to
completely manipulate all the other
audience they'd already been there they
were able to access the shrine earlier
so they kind of thought that they would
have would have had the capacity to earn
more but because they didn't know how
the system worked they're actually
earning less and the other people came
in and were able to sort of get the
tokens and and exchange and get lots
more beers and get to the party and some
people had to go home without having a
drink so and also we had like I was
there running a black market as well
which like totally screwing people over
so they would have they had these RFID
readers which were their wallets on
their fingers and so I would like to
sell them various things and they would
say it's like thirty duck presents token
so tell them and then they'd like put
their wallet down and I'd charge them
300 and then give it back and then
they'd have no cash left for their
drinks as well so I mean this is just
kind of like working and you got to know
what you're doing and they say this is
like bit of the video of the performance
and there's no sound for this yeah so
this is them the second group coming in
to the space that they're having the
knowledge that these shards which were
on trees are worth these things so these
were worth about like if you had been
standing at the shrine for three hours
and these were just in the space the
whole time whereas the first group
didn't even think to take them or know
that they could take them because there
were art installations and yeah so
people were then standing there we all
we thought because there was like you
know there's 150 people there and you
could maybe only fit like ten people
around the shrine that there'd be some
sort of fight happening to try and get
there but everyone was very polite also
what we kind of said that there are
enough of these shards the the ceramic
leaves and the tree for two each
but we didn't say you had to have two
each but everyone of course will say
very I mean it's it's Austria so it's a
social democratic country so they kind
of made sure that they only took two
each so yeah it's just this was like
what we could like a experimental like
crimped economic game that we did just
to play out what was happening and
involved a lot of a lot of people and so
I was just like to say thank you to all
of the participants include some max
from Tara zero who spoke yesterday and
this is something that I also want to
discuss quite a bit like both Max and
Ruth touched on it yesterday which is
this way of like Ruth called the Devo do
it with others this cooperative working
sort of situation which is something
that we really sort of like believing
like co-production like distributed sort
of production as well so it's and we
never work with just this one authorship
thing of a typical studio model
so yeah the this is like from mr. Savage
that kind of describes a bit of the
philosophy behind riot which is
production in the 21st century works
with distributed authorship and
identities as presenting processes coded
in the fragmentations of global networks
contemporary post artistic output is
developed out of collective inquiries
research processes a results of
distributed agency between humans
machines and programs there is nothing
more than to leave traces and not
produce final products but process
artifacts so this is how we describe
most of our practice like we don't
produce artworks we produce these
leftovers from the various actions that
we perform and so I also kind of wanted
to describe like how we moved from this
idea of the Research Institute for art
and technology to a Institute for future
group to economics and and this is kind
of when we're talking about sort of this
experiments I was showing that space and
art and value you'll realize that
technology is is like not just sort of
like a gadget it's a tool it's a
strategy it's a method of doing things
so if you want to like hacker technology
if you want to work with artistic
technology
you need to look beyond just sort of
like you know arduino x' and things like
that because technologies are also
institutions technologies or economies
technologies are serve laws and and and
contracts and all these types of
technologies we work with now and and we
believe that the crypto economics is a
way to work to kind of like really sort
of hack and and make and be artistic
with these types of technologies so this
is kind of like how we describe crypto
economics so crypto economics works with
projections of future events often
dubbed reverse game theory crypto
economics creates a test bed for
predicted outcomes of incentives and
penalties in close relation to
real-world economics but as crypto
economics are only one aspect of
summoning the future on example of
mechanism design for instance other
tools and methods of inquiry exist which
can be considered to research future
crypto economics we utilize this
interdisciplinary research or more
specifically what we call speculative
devices which is I guess speculative
fiction in a sense and artistic
technologies and so again like I was
going to draw attention to the do it
with others part which is basically how
we work this is us
we work in this very open workshop model
invite a lot of people to work with as
you saw a lot of our previous works were
or cooperate cooperations and then I
kind of want to end with a quote from
the end of a talk yesterday from Max
ouch here with the flower flower tokens
because I really loved what he said it
kind of defines what I wanted to oneness
of emphasize about working together on
these speculative futures and why you
need to work with multiple people so
maybe I should get max to stand up here
in quite a bit now so a constructive
approach is very much dependent on the
different narratives of the future you
see as potential and how potential they
are relies on your knowledge of
scenarios related to them
each of these constituent aspects of the
approach the narratives you depend on
which themselves stem from the scenarios
relate to them will change via the
process of I teary-eyed totally create
micro environments and experiments and
obviously the more people you have
involved in these processes also brings
more narratives and more perspectives so
yeah hopefully that's kind of given a
bit of idea of how knowledge technology
value currency crypto kind of can sort
of work together and be almost the same
thing so yeah I would like to thank open
Austria for bringing me here I'm
Australian but I live in Austria so
don't get too confused and yeah so sign
up to our newsletter write news you can
or visit our website right 18 and yeah
contact me or Twitter or email so thank
you
[Applause]